1851 - 15% world trade (3x china)

maintain naval superiority - peaceful trade routes

ships still patrolled with sails - then turbinia 1896 spithead review

age of dreadnought - speed and no masts so big guns
but it's germany big opportunity (cf Saxe cobirg family fight)

1909 - having to tax the wealthy to pay for dreadnoughts - democracy and social change

1914 - explored all the world - africa is basically just dirt so all the wealth has been found - now let's fight over it

Horrible trench warfare - just like 1860 civil war gatling gun - lots of different ways of trying to win - including gas.  but gas poor weapon - see that lord of rings guy - so finally build tanks and last year war is war of mobility - germany close to winning salient 

so modern system just in sight - blitzkreig was learning the lesson - move fast, go round the defences - israel the arming tanks outside cairo

epitomised by first gulf war.

but this modern war way is hard and expensive - if tanks move fast then infantry must be in carriers and so must all support and basically you fly the base in helicopters and set it up then move it next week - expensive and completely potinless firing chemical weapons at an army inside air conditioned tanks that travel at 70mph

but it also needs decentralised decision  making and high trust high mission - it's not how dictatorships work

But could a cyber dictator hip work it - could JiRa be used by dictatorship to command control army? 

First question of modern war


Second one is by 1923 airplanes had come into their own so drove yet another ship building phase - battle of midway was basically a 50/50 toss up

But cars (tanks) and aeroplane meant oil - so argument is strong that germany and japan both were challenger industrial powers limited by access to oil

And their rebuilding post war indicates that following a set pattern of democratic capitalistic government can provide the right way out for any country - china is the canary in that mine.  India looking good for the theory as isnphilipines and nigeria

Choosing when to kill hitler?
When churchill stood - there is enormous contingency - but also enormous potential for one right decision 


The history of past 150
years - old man advice 

Does oil still matter ? yes. look at helen  thomson books ? 

What is next energy revolution

what is next war dependant on - like mobility?

I think next war is over in a day - the war is cyber - the missiles will not miss their targets - any fleet of ships will be killed in first salvo if they had no counter measures (battle of midway counter measures was driving like a teenager in a car park)

now you shoot the missile down or it sinks you. 

so it's all down to counter measures which is mostly cyber and mostly you don't know what trojan chip exists.

Open source hardware verification is basically a national security issue

Also - non tank solution to trench warfare was stormtrooper - guys willing to jump in trench with a club.  it worked but you needed army of nut jobbers

so training evolved - see lindybeige and impact of ptsd etc 
